What's New In python-apt 0.7.100
================================
Python-apt 0.7.100 is a new major release of the python bindings for the APT
package management libraries. It provides support for Python 3, new language
features and an API conforming to :PEP:`8`.

Despite the many changes made in python-apt 0.7.100, the release still provides
backwards compatibility to the 0.7 series. This makes it possible to run your
old applications.

.. note::

    Applications using the old API should be updated to the new API because
    the old ones will be dropped in the 0.8 release. To build a python-apt
    variant without the deprecated API, build it without the -DCOMPAT_0_7
    compiler flag.

Support for Python 3
--------------------
Python-apt is the first Debian package to support the third major release of
Python. The port is straight forward and integrates as nicely in Python 3 as
the Python 2 builds integrate in Python 2.

Please be aware that python-apt builds for Python 3 are built without the
compatibility options enabled for Python 2 builds. They also do not provide
methods like :meth:`has_key` on mapping objects, because it has been removed
in Python 3.

Python 3 support may be disabled by distributions.

Real classes in :mod:`apt_pkg`
------------------------------
The 0.7.100 release introduces real classes in the :mod:`apt_pkg` extension. This
is an important step forward and makes writing code much easier, because you
can see the classes without having to create an object first. It also makes
it easier to talk about those classes, because they have a real name now.

The 0.7 series shipped many functions for creating new objects, because the
classes were not exported. In 0.7.100, the classes themselves replace those
functions, as you can see in the following table.

.. table::

    ===================================== =================================
    Function                               Replacing class
    ===================================== =================================
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetAcquire`            :class:`apt_pkg.Acquire`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetCache()`            :class:`apt_pkg.Cache`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetCdrom()`            :class:`apt_pkg.Cdrom`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetDepCache()`         :class:`apt_pkg.DepCache`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetPackageManager`     :class:`apt_pkg.PackageManager`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetPkgAcqFile`         :class:`apt_pkg.AcquireFile`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetPkgActionGroup`     :class:`apt_pkg.ActionGroup`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetPkgProblemResolver` :class:`apt_pkg.ProblemResolver`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetPkgRecords`         :class:`apt_pkg.PackageRecords`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetPkgSourceList`      :class:`apt_pkg.SourceList`
    :func:`apt_pkg.GetPkgSrcRecords`      :class:`apt_pkg.SourceRecords`
    :func:`apt_pkg.ParseSection`          :class:`apt_pkg.TagSection`
    :func:`apt_pkg.ParseTagFile`          :class:`apt_pkg.TagFile`
    ===================================== =================================

Complete rename of functions, methods and attributes
-----------------------------------------------------
In May 2008, Ben Finney reported bug 481061 against the python-apt package,
asking for PEP8 conformant names. With the release of python-apt 0.7.100, this
is finally happening.

Context managers for the :keyword:`with` statement
--------------------------------------------------
This is not a real big change, but it's good to have it:
:class:`apt_pkg.ActionGroup` can now be used as a context manager for the
:keyword:`with` statement. This makes it more obvious that you are using an
action group, and is just cooler::

    with apt_pkg.ActionGroup(depcache):
        for package in my_selected_packages:
            depcache.mark_install(package)

This also works for :class:`apt.Cache`::

    with cache.actiongroup(): # cache is an Instance of apt.Cache
        for package in my_selected_packages:
            package.mark_install() # Instance of apt.Package

Yet another context manager is available for locking the package system::

    with apt_pkg.SystemLock():
        # do your stuff here
        pass

There is also one for file based locking::

    with apt_pkg.FileLock(filename):
        # do your stuff here
        pass


Unification of dependency handling
----------------------------------
In apt 0.7.XX, there were three different return types of functions parsing
dependencies.

First of all, there were :func:`apt_pkg.ParseDepends()` and
:func:`apt_pkg.ParseSrcDepends()` which returned a list of or groups (which
are lists themselves) which contain tuples in the format ``(package,ver,op)``,
whereas op is one of "<=",">=","<<",">>","=","!=".

Secondly, there was Package.DependsListStr which returned a dictionary mapping
the type of the dependency (e.g. 'Depends', 'Recommends') to a list similar to
those of :func:`apt_pkg.ParseDepends()`. The only difference was that the
values ">>", "<<" of op are ">", "<" instead.

Thirdly, there was SourceRecords.BuildDepends, which returned a simple list
of tuples in the format ``(package, version, op, type)``, whereas ``op`` was
the integer representation of those ">>", "<<" actions and ``type`` an integer
representing the type of the dependency (e.g. 'Build-Depends'). The whole
format was almost useless from the Python perspective because the string
representations or constants for checking the values were not exported.

python-apt 0.7.100 puts an end to this confusion and uses one basic format, which
is the format known from Package.DependsListStr. The format change only applies
to the new functions and attributes, i.e. :attr:`SourceRecords.build_depends`
will now return a dict, whereas :attr:`SourceRecords.BuildDepends` will still
return the classic format. The functions :func:`apt_pkg.parse_depends` and
:func:`apt_pkg.parse_src_depends` now use the same values for ``op`` as
:attr:`Package.DependsListStr` does.

Example::

    >>> s = apt_pkg.SourceRecords()
    >>> s.lookup("apt")
    1
    >>> s.build_depends
    {'Build-Depends': [[('debhelper', '5.0', '>=')],
                       [('libdb-dev', '', '')],
                       [('gettext', '0.12', '>=')],
                       [('libcurl4-gnutls-dev', '', ''),
                        ('libcurl3-gnutls-dev', '7.15.5', '>=')],
                       [('debiandoc-sgml', '', '')],
                       [('docbook-utils', '0.6.12', '>=')],
                       [('xsltproc', '', '')],
                       [('docbook-xsl', '', '')],
                       [('xmlto', '', '')]]}
    >>> s.BuildDepends
    [('debhelper', '5.0', 2, 0),
    ('libdb-dev', '', 0, 0),
    ('gettext', '0.12', 2, 0),
    ('libcurl4-gnutls-dev', '', 16, 0),
    ('libcurl3-gnutls-dev', '7.15.5', 2, 0),
    ('debiandoc-sgml', '', 0, 0),
    ('docbook-utils', '0.6.12', 2, 0),
    ('xsltproc', '', 0, 0),
    ('docbook-xsl', '', 0, 0),
    ('xmlto', '', 0, 0)]

C++ headers
------------
The 0.7.100 release introduces python-apt-dev which provides headers for
developers to provide Python support in the libapt-pkg-using application.

.. warning::

    As of 0.7.93, those headers are still considered experimental and their
    API may change without prior notice.

Other changes
-------------
This release of python-apt also features several other, smaller changes:

    * Reduced memory usage by making :class:`apt.Cache` create
      :class:`apt.Package()` object dynamically, instead of creating all of
      them during the cache initialization.
    * Support to set the candidate version in :class:`apt.package.Package`

Porting your applications to python-apt 0.8 API
------------------------------------------------
Porting your application to the new python-apt 0.8 API may be trivial. You
should download the source tarball of python-apt and run the tool
utils/migrate-0.8 using Python 2.6 over your code::

    python2.6 utils/migrate-0.8.py -c myapp.py mypackage/

This will search your code for places where possibly deprecated names are
used. Using the argument ``-c``, you can turn colorized output on.

Now that you know which parts of your code have to be changed, you have to know
how to do this. For classes, please look at the table. For all attributes,
methods, functions, and their parameters the following rules apply:

    1. Replace leading [A-Z] with [a-z] (e.g DescURI => descURI)
    2. Replace multiple [A-Z] with [A-Z][a-z] (e.g. descURI => descUri)
    3. Replace every [A-Z] with the corresponding [a-z] (descUri => desc_uri)

As an exception, refixes such as 'de' (e.g. 'dequote') or 'un' (e.g. 'unlock')
are normally not separated by underscores from the next word. There are also
some other exceptions which are listed here, and apply to any name containing
this word: **filename**, **filesize**, **destdir**, **destfile**, **dequote**,
**unlock**, **reinstall**, **pinfile**, **REINSTREQ**, **UNPACKED**,
**parse_commandline**.
